                  TerrainBase Global Terrain Model
                       Summary Documentation
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Description
        Data Set Name:          National Geophysical Data Center
                                TerrainBase Global DTM Version 1.0
        File Name:              TBASE.BIN


Coverage
        Area Coverage:          Worldwide
        Coordinate Coverage:    90 N to 90 S x 180 W to 180 E
        Topography/bathymetry/both:     Both


Grid Structure
        Cell Dimensions:        Latitude:  05'00"  Longitude:  05'00"
        Cell Registration:      Center of cell
        Total Grid Rows:        2160
        Total Grid Columns:     4320


Data Characteristics
        Elevation Units:        Meters
        Elevation Type: 
        Projection:             Latitude/longitude (no projection)
        Vertical Accuracy:      
        Horizontal Accuracy:    
        Null Land Value Designator:     N/A
        Null Ocean Value Designator:    0


Source
        Data Developer:         Lee W. Row, III and David Hastings
                                National Geophysical Data Center and World 
                                Data Center-A for Solid Earth Geophysics
                                Boulder, Colorado  U.S.A.



Model Development

Overview

The TerrainBase global digital terrain model contains a complete 
matrix of land elevation and ocean depth values for the entire world 
gridded at 5-minute intervals.  NGDC/WDC-A developed the model using 
the best public domain data available at the time of publication.  

This version of TerrainBase, called "beta test release 1.0," is the 
first of an ongoing sequence of global terrain models to be produced 
and disseminated by NGDC/WDC-A.  Subsequent releases will contain 
higher quality data and will supersede all previous versions.  The 
frequency of updates and level of quality enhancements will be 
dependent upon the contribution of new source data.

The global model was developed by integrating all of the data sets 
described in the previous chapter into a single model.  Model 
development was a three-step process that entailed regridding each 
individual regional model to 5-minutes, then patching each regridded 
model together into a single global model, and, finally, smoothing a 
few significant discontinuities at the boundaries of adjoining models.  
Each of these steps is discussed in detail in the following sections.  
The GRASS (version 4.1) geographic information system was used for all 
data processing.

A term to describe the type of height values represented in the model 
(such as mean, mode, point, etc.) cannot be assigned to the 
TerrainBase model since it is comprised of a variety of source data.  
The type of terrain height represented by these source data sets 
varies from one model to the next.  For example, the FNOC model has 
modal heights, while the USA model uses point heights, and the Europe 
model has mean heights.   Consequently, it is not possible to assign a 
single term to represent all of the height values given in the 
TerrainBase model.

To satisfy interested users, however, a term that can be used which is 
common to all of the source data is best estimate of height.  That is, 
the data represent the best estimate of height for each 5-minute cell.  
Although such a term has minimal scientific value, it does emphasize 
the fact that the data only represent reasonable estimates of the 
height of the terrain.




Regional Model Regridding

The first step in model development entailed regridding each regional 
model into 5-minute grids.  Twenty-six regional and worldwide terrain 
models were used to create the TerrainBase model.  Each of these input 
models is described individually in detail in the previous chapter.  A 
5-minute grid spacing was chosen for this model since this is the 
highest global resolution that can be supported by the individual data 
sets.

Two types of processes were used to regrid the source files.  For 
source models that had grid spacing smaller than 5-minutes, a matrix 
filter was used to average adjoining cells into 5-minute cells.  
Averaging entailed taking the non-weighted mean of all input cells that 
fell within the boundaries of the 5-minute output cell.  For some 
models, this process entailed point sampling the data to a smaller grid
cell spacing that is an even divisor of 5-arc-minutes and then 
averaging these cells to create 5-minute cells. For source models that 
had a grid spacing larger than 5-minutes, a linear interpolation 
process was used to regrid the data to 5-minutes.

Averaging with a matrix filter was also used to convert 5-minute models 
from a grid intersection registration to a center of cell registration.  
Users should note that models that have been re-registered in this 
manner are somewhat smoothed in comparison to the original model.  These 
include only the Australia, and Northwest Territories models.

Each of the individual input models is listed in Figure 5.1 of the 
TerrainBase User Manual along with the type of processing that was 
used in regridding to 5 minutes.


Data Integration

After each regional model was regridded to 5 minutes, it was integrated 
with the other DTMs into a single file of continuous global land and 
ocean coverage.  The models were combined using a technique in GRASS 
called "patching" which permits the integration of gridded files with 
arbitrary spatial coverage.  This technique generates an output model by 
assembling multiple input models in a prioritized order.  The highest 
quality input models were assigned the highest priority, and the poorest 
quality models were assigned the lowest priority.  Assembly takes place 
by using the highest priority input model and filling in areas of no 
data coverage with data from the model that is second in order.  Areas 
of no data coverage are denoted by cells containing a numeric zero value.  
Next the third model is applied to fill in any areas not covered by the 
first and second model. This process continues until all models have 
been applied in their specified order.  The advantage of this process is 
that it enables the highest quality input models to cover as much area 
of the output model as possible and using the lowest quality models only 
to fill in gaps where better quality data is not available.  A example 
of this scheme is shown in the TerrainBase User Manual.

The order in which the input models were integrated is provided in the 
list below.  Coverage of input files as they exist in the final global 
model are shown in Figures 5.2 through 5.9 of the user manual.  U.S. 
coastal bathymetric data was not used in the global model due to 
substantial offsets between it and the ETOPO5 bathymetry data.


Ordering of Source Data used to Compile the 
TerrainBase Global Model

1.      Italy                   10.     America
2.      Austria                 11.     Northwest Territories, Canada
3.      Netherlands             12.     Andes Mountains and
4.      Madagascar                      Peru-Chile Trench
5.      Haiti                   13.     Brazil Cerrados
6.      U.S.A.                  14.     Australia
7.      Greenland               15.     Japan
8.      Africa                  16.     ETOPO5 bathymetry
9.      Europe                  17.     FNOC topography
                


The next step in model development was testing for significant errors 
and artifacts.  A number of data spikes were identified in this process 
and methods were developed for correcting them.  Several dozen spikes 
were corrected using an automated method that replaced each erroneous 
cell with the mean of the neighboring eight cells.  Several other spikes 
were corrected by modifying obvious errors such as replacing missing 
negative signs or replacing missing zeros.  Contact NGDC for a listing 
of corrected cells.


Reducing Boundary Discontinuities

One artifact of producing a global model using the method described 
above is vertical misalignment between the borders of regional models.  
Vertical offsets which break the continuity of the terrain surface 
represented by the model have been detected along many of the 
boundaries where regional models adjoin.  Fortunately, nearly all of 
the offsets are small and are well within the vertical tolerance of 
the 5-minute global model.  The only region where the offsets are 
significant are in South America along the boundaries of the Brazil 
Cerrados DTM and in Antarctica at the southern edge of the ETOPO5 
bathymetry model.  Offsets along these boundaries range from tens to 
several hundreds of meters.

In South America, the main cause of the offsets is the lower data 
accuracy in the areas where the input models adjoin.  Offsets are most 
prominent in the Amazon Basin, Paraguay, and Southern Brazil, where 
the quality of the source models appears relatively poor.  In these 
areas, the density of source data used to generate the regional models 
are low, and consequently the quality of the models in these areas is 
poor.  The low density of source data manifests itself as areas of low 
grid detail in the FNOC model and as broad undulating spurious features 
in the Brazil model.  Where the two models adjoin, the data show 
practically no agreement between each model.  Since there is a lack of 
good comparative data for the area, it is not yet possible to determine 
which model (FNOC, Andes, or Brazil) is more accurate along the 
boundaries.

A few different methods were tested to reduce the discontinuities 
between data sets in South America.  The only method that worked 
satisfactorily was to smooth the data along the boundaries using a 
matrix filter.  A 5x5 filter was applied to an area that extended 5 cell 
widths from each boundary.  The boundaries where the filter was applied 
are shown in Figure 5.10.  The filter has the effect of replacing each 
cell with the non-weighted mean of itself and the surrounding 24 
neighboring cells to create a highly smoothed output grid. Figure 5.11 
shows the before and after appearance of a portion of the smoothed 
boundary which illustrates the abrupt offset being converted to a 
smoothly tapered offset.

Such a modification is merely cosmetic, since filtering does not 
improve the reliability of the data.  Boundary offsets are undesirable 
from a scientific standpoint whether they are smoothed or not.  The 
only desirable option for correcting these offsets is to replace the 
data along the boundaries with more accurate values.  Unfortunately, 
such a correction is not possible at this time due to the lack of 
reliable data for the area.  Hopefully, better quality data can be 
obtained to alleviate this problem in future releases of TerrainBase.

Discontinuities near Antarctica were not smoothed due to the nature of 
the offsets in this area.  Below 78 S, where the ETOPO5 bathymetry model 
terminates, there are no other bathymetric data available.  Ocean cells 
south of 78 S were filled with numeric zeros which denote null values.   
This produces a broad, flat, zero-elevation terrace extending from 78 S 
to the Antarctic coast.  At 78 S, a sharp drop-off occurs where the shelf 
meets the edge of the bathymetry model.  Smoothing this boundary would 
have little purpose since it would entail modifying the bathymetry data, 
in part, to conform with the null data.  In addition, smoothing would 
also have minimal impact on the cosmetic appearance of this 
discontinuity. This problem only affects the southernmost coastal areas 
of the Ross and Weddell Seas.

